# 15 Sep 2021

Day residue: #Anxiety about video conferencing later on today with the rest of the company

### 7:20am

I’m sitting at my workstation at a cramped table in an unfamiliar room with other engineers from [[Glossary#work|my team]] at #work. We are going around the table giving status updates on our projects, and it gets to Steve M (from a prior workplace), sitting clockwise to me around the corner. It’s a different face from the Steve I once worked with (much closer to John R). But he seems to have the same stage-fright that I experience, extremely so—to the point where he isn’t able to even start speaking his update. He sits there for a while, staring at his screen, sweating profusely and contorting his face and mouth in different ways as he desperately tries to find his words. I feel #proud of him for taking the advice I usually give to myself to take his time on the spot instead of quickly rushing through what he has to say. But I do start to get concerned because many seconds have now passed and it’s beginning to seem like he isn’t ever going to say anything. #peer-pressure

Abruptly he pulls a #clever trick. He announces—as though he’s been the call lead the whole time and it’s best to get the call going—it is now someone’s turn to speak. I figure he is taking advantage of the time people just spent not hearing his update, hoping they would forget it’s really his turn to speak. The ploy seems to work. In the next moment, we are no longer in that room at a table with our computers, but sitting outside on grass in chairs in a #circle. The person Steve called to speak isn’t me, but the person he selects then chooses me as the one who will answer a question _they_ will ask.

The request is to tell the group something about _croquette_ (cro-KAY). I stand up, seemingly without my normal nerves I get when speaking to a crowd, and after a couple seconds reflecting I realize I need to say _something_, even if just to tide them over while I think of something more substantial. So I say “well, it reminds me of Britain” while gesturing to the leader of the group directly across the circle from me. It’s the [[Glossary#professor|professor]] originally from the UK whose online math course I took a while back. This elicits a chuckle from the group, and I go back to considering a more thorough answer. But after a few moments reflection, unable to come up with anything, I wake up at 7:20am before my alarm.
