Dreaming/Specimens/2023/10 - Feb 3 - Dentistry at the Mall.md, before:

# 3 Feb 2023

**8:00 am**

It's night time and I'm at the mall with Tsoding (1), hanging around in a common area. We both have a shotgun and are doing tricks with them, throwing them in the air and spinning them, etc. He's getting a bit too cavalier for my likes, so I stop playing around with my gun and hope he does the same, but he doesn't seem to share my concern. I'm worried with how carelessly he's acting that he's going to accidentally pull the trigger (2) and someone will get hurt.

I start moving around the mall on a power chair that is clunky to operate with its hand controls, but with patience it gets me where I want to go with reasonable (but not perfect) precision. It slowly raises and lowers by about a meter so I can lift up to read things at various heights above the ground. The mall layout is very complex and I can't figure out where I am in it. I'm looking for a bus terminal in the area but I'm repeatedly frustrated when several attempts to leave the mall at various doors don't lead out to a bus stop. I'm having trouble matching the layout of the mall with any internal map I have of it; I don't seem to have a good grasp on where I am or where anything is.

Dentistry seems to be a big offering of this mall. Across a few different dream segments I am visiting (observing from outside) and considering a different dentist office, each with its own characteristic branding colour, the way many popular websites are associated with one colour (Facebook blue, Twitter cyan, etc.). There is a red themed office, a green one, and an orange one. I spend a little while close to each one and contemplate them. There is a major long division component assigned to them and I'm spending most of my cognitive power doing long division in my head, most commonly (maybe exclusively) with the divisor 8 and dividends of 4 or 5 digits. I don't have paper to do the arithmetic in writing, so I strain my brain to compute whether the 8 divides the numbers evenly, and conclude they probably do. As with normal mental arithmetic, by the time I reach the final digits of the dividend I struggle to remember my progress with the quotient up to that point.

I'm passing by one of the clinics when the dentist sees me, and, surprised and elated, he rushes out to greet me. At first he seems unfamiliar, but with effort I vaguely remember going there in the dream-past once for an emergency appointment, but I haven't gone back since. The more I think about it the more certain I am of the memory, though it's distant and difficult to remember any details other than that yes, I once did go there for urgent treatment. I feel a bit of guilt that it seems to be the only time I actually chose his clinic for care. At this point, I half wake up and try to reconcile this office with the one I go to now in waking life (Dr. L). But it's difficult to reconcile the two memories; the two systems are clashing for my exclusive awareness. I can't place the physical location of my real-life dentist office in an absolute or relative way; I just can't recall where it is on the real map in my half-dreaming state.

At one point I put a bit of speed onto my wandering with the power chair, and end up bumping into a wall display full of wine bottles. It's not difficult to ward off the idea of buying some.

I leave the mall at some point into the darkness of the night, still in my power chair. I'm on the wide cement walkway areas surrounding the west side of what is now obviously the Lambton Mall, outside the Sport Chek entrance (A). Some flying machine the size of a small car pops into our dimension from the west, a hundred or so feet up, on course to land eastbound close to me. It's a very alien presence, he obviously doesn't belong to this dimension normally. He manages the landing south-east of me, beyond where I'm sitting, and starts turning around to taxi in the opposite direction. By this point I've taken out my cell phone and have started getting video of him taxiing around. On my phone, there is the usual camera lens at the top of the phone, but also one on the right side. I can't tell which one is actually doing the recording, so I hold the phone horizontally in the air and rotate it back and forth 90 degrees every few seconds in order to get at least half of the footage captured through whichever lens is actually doing it. The flyer complains that he's broken into some other dimension. I kind of figured that since this is the weirdest thing I've ever seen.

## Day Residue

(1) I watched the first 30 minutes of Tsoding's video on Rust Macros in the hour before sleeping: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LYIn_Ewpq-E

(2) The same concern I had reading p. 826 of The Stand earlier in the evening, when Harold puts his Smith & Wesson revolver under his pillow

## Locations

(A) https://goo.gl/maps/xCHj7y2me3Ln9RCb8 . The craft's flight path starts roughly over Lambton Mall Rd. to the west, over the parking lot and onto the cement south of the Sport Chek entrance

Commit message:

clarify lens is on top edge

Dreaming/Specimens/2023/10 - Feb 3 - Dentistry at the Mall.md, after:

# 3 Feb 2023

**8:00 am**

It's night time and I'm at the mall with Tsoding (1), hanging around in a common area. We both have a shotgun and are doing tricks with them, throwing them in the air and spinning them, etc. He's getting a bit too cavalier for my likes, so I stop playing around with my gun and hope he does the same, but he doesn't seem to share my concern. I'm worried with how carelessly he's acting that he's going to accidentally pull the trigger (2) and someone will get hurt.

I start moving around the mall on a power chair that is clunky to operate with its hand controls, but with patience it gets me where I want to go with reasonable (but not perfect) precision. It slowly raises and lowers by about a meter so I can lift up to read things at various heights above the ground. The mall layout is very complex and I can't figure out where I am in it. I'm looking for a bus terminal in the area but I'm repeatedly frustrated when several attempts to leave the mall at various doors don't lead out to a bus stop. I'm having trouble matching the layout of the mall with any internal map I have of it; I don't seem to have a good grasp on where I am or where anything is.

Dentistry seems to be a big offering of this mall. Across a few different dream segments I am visiting (observing from outside) and considering a different dentist office, each with its own characteristic branding colour, the way many popular websites are associated with one colour (Facebook blue, Twitter cyan, etc.). There is a red themed office, a green one, and an orange one. I spend a little while close to each one and contemplate them. There is a major long division component assigned to them and I'm spending most of my cognitive power doing long division in my head, most commonly (maybe exclusively) with the divisor 8 and dividends of 4 or 5 digits. I don't have paper to do the arithmetic in writing, so I strain my brain to compute whether the 8 divides the numbers evenly, and conclude they probably do. As with normal mental arithmetic, by the time I reach the final digits of the dividend I struggle to remember my progress with the quotient up to that point.

I'm passing by one of the clinics when the dentist sees me, and, surprised and elated, he rushes out to greet me. At first he seems unfamiliar, but with effort I vaguely remember going there in the dream-past once for an emergency appointment, but I haven't gone back since. The more I think about it the more certain I am of the memory, though it's distant and difficult to remember any details other than that yes, I once did go there for urgent treatment. I feel a bit of guilt that it seems to be the only time I actually chose his clinic for care. At this point, I half wake up and try to reconcile this office with the one I go to now in waking life (Dr. L). But it's difficult to reconcile the two memories; the two systems are clashing for my exclusive awareness. I can't place the physical location of my real-life dentist office in an absolute or relative way; I just can't recall where it is on the real map in my half-dreaming state.

At one point I put a bit of speed onto my wandering with the power chair, and end up bumping into a wall display full of wine bottles. It's not difficult to ward off the idea of buying some.

I leave the mall at some point into the darkness of the night, still in my power chair. I'm on the wide cement walkway areas surrounding the west side of what is now obviously the Lambton Mall, outside the Sport Chek entrance (A). Some flying machine the size of a small car pops into our dimension from the west, a hundred or so feet up, on course to land eastbound close to me. It's a very alien presence, he obviously doesn't belong to this dimension normally. He manages the landing south-east of me, beyond where I'm sitting, and starts turning around to taxi in the opposite direction.

By this point I've taken out my cell phone and have started getting video of him taxiing around. On my phone, there are two camera lenses: one on the top edge and another on the right edge. I can't tell which one is actually doing the recording, so I hold the phone horizontally in the air and rotate it back and forth 90 degrees every few seconds in order to get at least half of the footage captured through whichever lens is actually doing it. The flyer complains that he's broken into some other dimension. I kind of figured that since this is the weirdest thing I've ever seen.

## Day Residue

(1) I watched the first 30 minutes of Tsoding's video on Rust Macros in the hour before sleeping: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LYIn_Ewpq-E

(2) The same concern I had reading p. 826 of The Stand earlier in the evening, when Harold puts his Smith & Wesson revolver under his pillow

## Locations

(A) https://goo.gl/maps/xCHj7y2me3Ln9RCb8 . The craft's flight path starts roughly over Lambton Mall Rd. to the west, over the parking lot and onto the cement south of the Sport Chek entrance
