"I have been engaged for many years ... in unravelling certain psycho-pathological structures--hysterical phobias, obsessional ideas, and so on. I have been doing so, in fact, ever since I learnt from an important communication by Josef Breuer that **as regards these structures ... unravelling them coincides with removing them**.  If a pathological idea of this sort can be traced back to the elements in the patient's mental life from which it originated, it simultaneously crumbles away and the patient is freed from it." p. 126

"It was in the course of these psycho-analytic studies that I came upon dream-interpretation." p. 126

Section about preparing the patient by encouraging them to relentlessly abandon their critical faculties, the censorship that sifts through their thought processes as they come up, deciding which to pursue and which to avoid.  The success of the  analysis "depends on his noticing and reporting whatever comes into his head and not being misled, for instance, into suppressing an idea because it strikes him as unimportant or irrelevant or because it seems to him meaningless.  He must adopt a completely impartial attitude to what occurs to him, since **it is precisely his critical attitude which is responsible for his being unable** ... to achieve the desired unraveling of his dream or obessional idea ..." p. 126

Freud compares the frames of mind of people who are merely "reflecting" vs. self-observing their own psychical processes.  "In both cases attention must be concentrated, but the man who is reflecting is also exercising his *critical* faculty; this leads him to reject some of the ideas that occur to him after perceiving them, to cut short others without following the trains of thought which they would open up to him, and to behave in such a way towards still others that they never become conscious at all and are accordingly suppressed before being perceived.  The self-observer on the other hand need only take the trouble to suppress his critical faculty." p. 126

Obviously this task is difficult for some people.  "The 'involuntary thoughts' are liable to release a most violent resistance, which seeks to prevent their emergence."  Philosopher Friedrich Schiller compares the similarity between the suppression of critical faculty with the attitude of a poetic creator.

In 1788, Schiller writes a letter to Körner, in reply to his frustration with an overbearing critical faculty.  "Looked at in isolation, a thought may seem very trivial or very fantastic; but it may be made important by another thought that comes after it, and, **in conjunction with other thoughts that may seem equally absurd, it may turn out to form a most effective link**.  Reason cannot form any opinion upon all this unless it retains the thought long enough to look at it in connection with the others." p. 128

Freud advises dealing with the individual portions of the dream separately instead of as a whole.  "If I say to a patient who is still a novice: 'What occurs to you in connection with this dream?' as a rule his mental horizon becomes a blank.  If, however, I put the dream before him cut up into pieces, he will give me a series of associations to each piece, which might be described as the 'background thoughts' of that particular part of the dream." p. 128

Freud estimates he's analysed over a thousand dreams in his practice, but he generally disregards them as material for his book because:
* they are from neuropaths, and the derived theory may not apply to normal people
* analysis relies on patient's case history which would necessitate a lengthy intro

This leaves his own dreams and those reported to him casually by other people, but in the latter case he lacks "the analysis without which I cannot discover a dream's meaning".  Freud ruminates on the task of revealing intimate facts about his life.  "... It is safe to assume that my readers too will very soon find their initial interest in the indiscretions which I am bound to make replaced by an absorbing immersion in the psychological problems upon which they throw light.

"Accordingly I shall proceed to choose out one of my own dreams and demonstrate upon it my method of interpretation. ... And now I must ask the reader to make my interests his own for quite a while, and to plunge, along with me, into the minutest details of my life; for a transference of this kind is peremptorily demanded by our interest in the hidden meaning of dreams." p. 130
