# 1 Jan 2019

I'm in a city constructed only of hallow concrete columns in the middle of a #desert, with sand going off to the horizon in every direction.  The columns are wide enough for each floor to have as much space as a floor of a house, but their vertical scale allows for hundreds of floors, connected by a network of staircases throughout.  The columns are situated many dozens of meters apart from each other, and drones buzz to and fro, transferring things between them.

A small fraction of the columns, though identical in appearance to the others around them, actually serve as missile silos, each holding a nuclear ICBM.  Together they constitute a deterrent against aggression from other, far-off cities. #weapon

I'm #walking around aimlessly within one of the columns in this city, eavesdropping here and there on the din of many boisterous gatherings, watching the revellers party the day away.  I look through a hole in a wall and see two men, laughing and joking and enjoying each other's company, both wearing masks as if in a theatrical drama.

Without warning the ICBM columns open up and the missiles launch.  I can't tell whether it's a preemptive strike or retaliation for an incoming strike, but they're up and away now regardless, and the city will be engulfed in fire within minutes.  The other citizens don't seem to be aware this has happened, so it confuses them when I start dashing around, frantically tearing pages at random out of their journals and stuffing them into a leather pouch I have strapped to my stomach.  They protest loudly at my sudden theft, but I don't care, since I have very little time to collect the pages before the incoming missiles arrive.

After filling my pouch with journal pages, I run down the various staircases until I'm close enough to the ground that I can survive a jump into the sand.  I open an escape hatch in the side of the column and #jump out.  I begin frantically burying myself in the sand--not in an attempt to save my life, since a couple feet of sand isn't going to do that.  My last memory is one of being almost completely #buried, face-down, except for the fingers on one of my hands protruding from the surface of the sand.

### Thousands of Years Later

A group of youths are on a tour around a museum of ancient history.  The dimly-lighted rooms are quiet and still and various tour groups explore the exhibits within them.  At the end of the tour for one group, there is a deaf and mute girl confined to a #wheelchair, being patiently pushed around by her assistant.

This is the last exhibit this group will visit today, and the girl in the wheelchair stays back while the rest of her group leaves the room, until it is just she and her attendant.  She is pushed right up to the exhibit.  Encased within a glass box the size of a large coffin is a block of sand, in part turned to opaque black glass from the blast of a nuclear explosion many millennia earlier.  Although the wheelchair-bound girl can't read it, the inscription on the plaque on the enclosure recounts the archaeological excavation of the person now permanently encased in the glassy sand.  The excavators had carved out only the rectangular block that entombed the body within, not the body itself, so only a few fingertips now protrude from the block.  Deaf and mute, the girl reaches out her own hand and touches the enclosure with her fingertips.
