# 10 Feb 2019

I'm being #buried by two men, but I'm still alive.  My seemingly dead body has just been tossed into a freshly dug grave, not in a cemetery, but into a dirt pit dug about six feet underneath the floor of a basement of the home of the two men.  I am only pretending to be dead, so I'm able to hear them as they chat dispassionately to each other about some unrelated thing, as though this is something they do regularly and it's just another time they're doing it.  There is no hint of guilt or conspiracy in their voices; this is just another casual task for them, uninteresting in comparison to the topic of their discussion. #death

I am still alive however, and only pretending to be dead, having stopped my breathing almost entirely.  I fully intended to do this, and I know it won't kill me, so I'm very #calm, like an actual cadaver.  I was thrown into the pit on my right side, and now they're shovelling piles of #cold, gritty dirt onto me, landing on my left cheek first and eventually covering my whole body.  Their voices gradually fade to a quiet muffle as the layers of dirt are piled on, until everything around me is black and silent.

When my burial is finished, I jolt upright and rise quickly through the dirt, through the floor and back into the basement I was buried under.  Although no time has passed for me, it has been about a year for the two men, who jump to their feet quite surprised / #shocked that I'm standing there in front of them.  Their shock is quickly overtaken by panic and fear of an #insect that has come up from the ground with me.  It starts crawling towards them, so they jump up on chairs and tables to evade it.  The more they try to get away from it, however, the faster it moves, until it is #dashing at light speed around the room, throwing them into fits of panic.
