Neuroscience/Sleep.md, before:

[Augmenting hippocampal–prefrontal neuronal synchrony during sleep enhances memory consolidation in humans](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-023-01324-5) #gev23 (2023)

"Synchronizing the stimulation to the active phases of endogenous slow waves in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) enhanced sleep spindles, boosted locking of brain-wide neural spiking activity to MTL slow waves, and improved coupling between MTL ripples and thalamocortical oscillations. Furthermore, synchronized stimulation enhanced the accuracy of recognition memory. ... Notably, individual changes in memory accuracy were highly correlated with electrophysiological effects. Our results indicate that hippocampo–thalamocortical synchronization during sleep causally supports human memory consolidation." (Abstract)

[Cortical regulation of two-stage rapid eye movement sleep](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01195-2) #don22 (2022)

"Here we show that the **retrosplenial cortex** (RSC) is selectively activated and initiates cortex-wide calcium waves during REM sleep." p. 1

- suppression of excitatory RSC neurons inhibited transition between two REM substages (temporally non-overlapping)
- no effect from suppression of secondary motor cortex (M2) or ACC

### The RSC is selectively activated during REM sleep

![[don22 fig 1d - eeg emg ca traces.png]]
**Figure 1D** Calcium traces of five cortical areas, EEG spectrogram, EMG trace, sleep states

![[don22 fig 1e - ca activity.png]]
**Figure 1E** Calcium activity during wake/NREM/REM

"Taken together, these results indicate that the RSC was selectively activated during REM sleep." p. 2

- causality analysis of activation *sequence* shows RSC activity precedes activity of other cortical areas (in REM but not during waking) suggesting initiating role of RSC
- seven common spatiotemporal motifs identified showing higher occurrence prob during REM or waking states
- "Interestingly, activity in all REM-active motifs initiated at the RSC, followed by local sustained activity, lateral propagation to V1 or anterior propagation to ACC. By contrast, motifs that were active in the wake state originated from diverse cortical regions, such as the parietal cortex. Thus, REM sleep was associated with unique patterns of cortical waves, and the RSC seems to play a role in initiating cortical waves during REM sleep." p. 3

### Two distinct patterns of RSC L2/3 neuronal activation during REM sleep

- RSC shows layer-specific activation during REM
- RSC layer 2/3 neurons more active during REM sleep than other states
- much higher in RSC than M2
- majority of layer 5 neurons inactive during REM

- two distinct populations of L2/3 neurons during REM
    - type I active within the first ~30s of REM
    - type II activated later
    - individual neuron identity varied across REM episodes

![[don22 fig 3de - two L23 subtypes during rem.png]]
**Figure 3DE** Two distinct neuron types active at different stages of REM sleep

### Analysis of mouse facial movements reveals two distinct substages of REM sleep

- mouse eye/whisker/cheek movements showed two distinct patterns, here called quiescent REM (qREM) and active REM (aREM)
- distinct EEG theta oscillations
- distinct heart rate variability, respiration rate, hemodynamics (autonomic nervous system)
- "Importantly, the qREM-to-aREM transition temporally matched the transition of RSC neuronal population activity patterns. The type I and II populations were active in qREM and aREM, respectively, and showed negative and positive CCs, respectively, with the aREM substage." p. 4

![[don22 fig 3f - distinct rem substages.png]]
**Figure 3F** Distinct eye/whisker/cheek movements during qREM/aREM

### The RSC is required for substage transition during REM sleep

- "... our results showed that RSC is not only a mediator of cortical waves, but is also actively involved in regulating substage transition during REM sleep." p. 6
- researchers light-inactivated RSC neurons 10s after REM onset and maintained throughout REM
- showed RSC inactivation reduced duration of aREM sleep, increased duration of qREM
- aREM initiation crucial for maintaining REM sleep
- inactivation largely inhibited qREM->aREM transition
- number of REM episodes increased

![[don22 fig 4hi - rem substages, episodes.png]]
**Figure 4H** Duration of qREM/aREM during inactivation/controls. **4I** Average duration of and number of REM episodes

---

[Rotating waves during human sleep spindles organize global patterns of activity that repeat precisely through the night](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.17267) (2016)

"We show here that cortical spindles are spatiotemporally organized into circular wave-like patterns, organizing neuronal activity over tens of milliseconds, within the timescale for storing memories in large-scale networks across the cortex via spike-time dependent plasticity. These circular patterns repeat over hours of sleep with millisecond temporal precision, allowing reinforcement of the activity patterns through hundreds of reverberations." (Abstract)

Spindle frequency: 11-15 Hz

Video of spindle wave rotation: https://elifesciences.org/articles/17267#media1

Commit message:

add #sar25 mitochondrial sleep pressure

Neuroscience/Sleep.md, after:

[Mitochondrial origins of the pressure to sleep](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09261-y) #sar25 (2025)

"(Discussion) Aerobic metabolism was the innovation that, following the first of two large increases in atmospheric $O_2$ levels 2.4 billion and 750–570 million years ago, allowed eukaryotes to maximize the free energy yield of electron transfers, setting the stage for the Cambrian explosion of multicellular life in the wake of the second $O_2$ revolution. Power-hungry nervous systems appeared—and with them, apparently, the need for sleep. Although sleep is likely to have since acquired additional functions, such as synaptic homeostasis or memory consolidation, an empirical power law that relates daily sleep amount to mass-specific $O_2$ consumption suggests that sleep serves an ancient metabolic purpose also in mammals. The allometric exponent in this power law is a multiple of $\frac{1}{4}$ rather than the $\frac{1}{3}$ expected from Euclidean geometric scaling—a sign that the distribution of resources by centralized networks, such as the vascular and respiratory systems, is responsible. Thanks to higher terminal branch densities, these networks allocate more $O_2$ to each cell in small animals, allowing their metabolism to run ‘hotter’ than that of large mammals, whose cells are supply-limited. The price to pay is a shorter life, a greater fraction of which is spent asleep." p. 6

![[sar25 fig 2a - mito electron transport.png]]

**Figure 2a** "Proton-pumping complexes I, III and IV convert the energy of electron transfers from NADH to $O_2$—through intermediates CoQ and cytochrome *c* (cyt *c*)—into a proton electrochemical gradient, *∆p*, across the IMM. Ucp4 discharges, whereas illumination (*hν*) of mito-dR charges, the IMM. The return of extruded protons to the matrix spins the blades of the ATP synthase and produces ATP, which leaves the matrix via sesB in exchange for cytoplasmic ADP. Neuronal ATP consumption is activity-dependent, in part because the plasma membrane Na⁺–K⁺ ATPase must restore ion gradients dissipated by action and excitatory synaptic currents. An oversupply (relative to ATP demand) of electrons to CoQ increases the risk of single-electron reductions of $O_2$ to $O_2^-$ at complexes I and III. AOX mitigates this risk." p. 4

h/t: https://www.science.org/content/blog-post/it-all-comes-down-mitochondria

"Sleep deprivation with nonstop activity of the mitochondria seem to induce more mitochondrial fission and recycling, and the various modifications all point in the direction of a buildup of mitochondrial electron surplus as the fundamental inducer of the need to sleep."

[Augmenting hippocampal–prefrontal neuronal synchrony during sleep enhances memory consolidation in humans](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-023-01324-5) #gev23 (2023)

"Synchronizing the stimulation to the active phases of endogenous slow waves in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) enhanced sleep spindles, boosted locking of brain-wide neural spiking activity to MTL slow waves, and improved coupling between MTL ripples and thalamocortical oscillations. Furthermore, synchronized stimulation enhanced the accuracy of recognition memory. ... Notably, individual changes in memory accuracy were highly correlated with electrophysiological effects. Our results indicate that hippocampo–thalamocortical synchronization during sleep causally supports human memory consolidation." (Abstract)

[Cortical regulation of two-stage rapid eye movement sleep](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01195-2) #don22 (2022)

"Here we show that the **retrosplenial cortex** (RSC) is selectively activated and initiates cortex-wide calcium waves during REM sleep." p. 1

- suppression of excitatory RSC neurons inhibited transition between two REM substages (temporally non-overlapping)
- no effect from suppression of secondary motor cortex (M2) or ACC

### The RSC is selectively activated during REM sleep

![[don22 fig 1d - eeg emg ca traces.png]]
**Figure 1D** Calcium traces of five cortical areas, EEG spectrogram, EMG trace, sleep states

![[don22 fig 1e - ca activity.png]]
**Figure 1E** Calcium activity during wake/NREM/REM

"Taken together, these results indicate that the RSC was selectively activated during REM sleep." p. 2

- causality analysis of activation *sequence* shows RSC activity precedes activity of other cortical areas (in REM but not during waking) suggesting initiating role of RSC
- seven common spatiotemporal motifs identified showing higher occurrence prob during REM or waking states
- "Interestingly, activity in all REM-active motifs initiated at the RSC, followed by local sustained activity, lateral propagation to V1 or anterior propagation to ACC. By contrast, motifs that were active in the wake state originated from diverse cortical regions, such as the parietal cortex. Thus, REM sleep was associated with unique patterns of cortical waves, and the RSC seems to play a role in initiating cortical waves during REM sleep." p. 3

### Two distinct patterns of RSC L2/3 neuronal activation during REM sleep

- RSC shows layer-specific activation during REM
- RSC layer 2/3 neurons more active during REM sleep than other states
- much higher in RSC than M2
- majority of layer 5 neurons inactive during REM

- two distinct populations of L2/3 neurons during REM
    - type I active within the first ~30s of REM
    - type II activated later
    - individual neuron identity varied across REM episodes

![[don22 fig 3de - two L23 subtypes during rem.png]]
**Figure 3DE** Two distinct neuron types active at different stages of REM sleep

### Analysis of mouse facial movements reveals two distinct substages of REM sleep

- mouse eye/whisker/cheek movements showed two distinct patterns, here called quiescent REM (qREM) and active REM (aREM)
- distinct EEG theta oscillations
- distinct heart rate variability, respiration rate, hemodynamics (autonomic nervous system)
- "Importantly, the qREM-to-aREM transition temporally matched the transition of RSC neuronal population activity patterns. The type I and II populations were active in qREM and aREM, respectively, and showed negative and positive CCs, respectively, with the aREM substage." p. 4

![[don22 fig 3f - distinct rem substages.png]]
**Figure 3F** Distinct eye/whisker/cheek movements during qREM/aREM

### The RSC is required for substage transition during REM sleep

- "... our results showed that RSC is not only a mediator of cortical waves, but is also actively involved in regulating substage transition during REM sleep." p. 6
- researchers light-inactivated RSC neurons 10s after REM onset and maintained throughout REM
- showed RSC inactivation reduced duration of aREM sleep, increased duration of qREM
- aREM initiation crucial for maintaining REM sleep
- inactivation largely inhibited qREM->aREM transition
- number of REM episodes increased

![[don22 fig 4hi - rem substages, episodes.png]]
**Figure 4H** Duration of qREM/aREM during inactivation/controls. **4I** Average duration of and number of REM episodes

---

[Rotating waves during human sleep spindles organize global patterns of activity that repeat precisely through the night](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.17267) (2016)

"We show here that cortical spindles are spatiotemporally organized into circular wave-like patterns, organizing neuronal activity over tens of milliseconds, within the timescale for storing memories in large-scale networks across the cortex via spike-time dependent plasticity. These circular patterns repeat over hours of sleep with millisecond temporal precision, allowing reinforcement of the activity patterns through hundreds of reverberations." (Abstract)

Spindle frequency: 11-15 Hz

Video of spindle wave rotation: https://elifesciences.org/articles/17267#media1
